---
layout: post
title: "Grace"
subtitle: "After all we can do..."
author: "Greg Macfarlane"
header-img: "img/christ_at_simon_veronese.jpg"
---


My wife Leslie and I love living in Raleigh; though I grew up in Utah my mother --- who is here today through sheer coincidence --- grew up in Richmond County and my ancestors have lived in this state since it was a colony. I feel a deep connection to this place, and feel that in a way I have returned home. 

I have not yet met as many of you as I would like; I promise that I am more friendly than I seem. I have a goal to seem more friendly. (**smile**)

I have been assigned to speak on grace.

# Grace
In his vision of the Savior's life, Nephi sees that the motivation for Christ "condescending" to earth and dying for the sins of the world is "the love of God, which sheddeth itself abroad in the hearts of the children of men."

Grace is not the Atonement, but the two concepts are inseparable. Through the Atonement, Christ paid the debts resulting from my sins and from your sins; Grace is both the reason why the Atonement happened, and also the means by which it works.

Sometimes, in an effort to distinguish ourselves from other strains of Christianity, I have heard Latter-day Saints overstate the role of our own deeds in our salvation. I have done this myself.

Nephi wrote, "we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do."([2 Nephi 25:23](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/bofm/2-ne/25.23?lang=eng#22)). There are two ways to interpret this scripture: the first, and the one that I think I've understood for most of my life is, "after I've done everything I can, Christ's grace will make up the rest." I think that this interpretation is useful, but ultimately incomplete.

An interpretation that I believe more correct is: "after everything I could possibly do, I would *still* be in an entirely hopeless and terrifying position without the Grace of Christ."

I had this point driven into me by Elder Holland of the Quorum of the Twelve, who was visiting my mission in Singapore. He told us, as I recorded in my notes, "Make no mistake; Latter-day Saints believe that we are saved by Grace and by Grace alone. But not by cheap grace."

## Becoming dead to the Law
Elder Holland was of course referring to the danger of assuming that because we are all wholly dependent on Grace, our obedience is immaterial. When we understand Grace properly, we are obedient, not because we think it will do us any good, but because we know that this is Christ's desire for us.

I think this is what Paul meant when he said,
 
> Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law by the body of Christ; ... But now we are delivered from the law...; that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter." --- [Romans 7:4-6](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/nt/rom/7.4?lang=eng)

The Nephites as a group actually reached this point: "wherefore the law hath become dead unto us, and we are made alive in Christ because of our faith; yet we keep the law because of the commandments."([2 Nephi 25:24](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/bofm/2-ne/25.24?lang=eng#24)). 

In both cases, Paul and Nephi are speaking explicitly about the Law of Moses. But I think it applies to existing commandments that we keep out of social pressure or expedience and not out of spiritual understanding. When we understand Grace, our motivation for keeping the commandments is turned inside-out.

President Uchtdorf spoke about this at this Spring's general conference. He said,

> Trying to understand God’s gift of grace with all our heart and mind gives us all the more reasons to love and obey our Heavenly Father with meekness and gratitude. As we walk the path of discipleship, it refines us, it improves us, it helps us to become more like Him, and it leads us back to His presence. “The Spirit of the Lord [our God]” brings about such “a mighty change in us, … that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually.” -- [Dieter F. Uchtdorf](https://www.lds.org/general-conference/2015/04/the-gift-of-grace?lang=eng#9-12565_000_47uchtdorf)  

In a way, the more people realize how little their own obedience matters, the more they **want** to be obedient; not to work themselves out of their debts, but to praise and thank Christ for their redemption. And they realize that their efforts to be obedient are themselves aided by Grace.

## Amazing Grace
The author of the evangelical hymn *Amazing Grace* was an 18th century English preacher named John Newton who in his younger life had been a sailor on different types of ships, including many years and several voyages in the slave trade; his crew would purchase prisoners in west Africa, ship them across the Atlantic in horrific and inhuman conditions, and sell them at profit to colonists in the New World. In addition to this base information, his Wikipedia entry includes the following note:

> Newton gained notoriety for being one of the most profane men the captain had ever met. In a culture where sailors commonly used oaths and swore, Newton was admonished several times for not only using the worst words the captain had ever heard, but creating new ones to exceed the limits of verbal debauchery. ---[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Newton)

Newton converted to Christianity -- in a way -- after he was nearly shipwrecked off the coast of Ireland. But looking at his life after his self-identified conversion, you can see that he wasn't fully and instantly converted from a remarkably vile sinner to a holy man. He continued to sail with slavers, for instance, and the hymn for which he is most famous was written while he still had significant investments in slave ships. But he seems to have set his life on a course where the Grace of Christ could work on him. 

To be clear: Newton did not and could not recover himself from the sins of his early life. In my understanding of grace, no effort he made towards self-improvement would have been successful on his own. But as he gradually committed his life to Christ, Christ's Grace could heal his old spiritual wounds and encourage him to identify the next area of his life that he could work on. Ultimately Newton became a major voice in the debate that led to Parliament outlawing the slave trade in 1807 and abolishing slavery throughout the empire in the 1830's.

## Acting with grace
As we acknowledge grace we ourselves become more obedient; but I think that we also become more patient with others' weaknesses. We see the debts that we have been cleared of, and know that those around us can be cleared in the same way.

Satan sometimes tempts us to sin by convincing us (sometimes rightly) that "everyone does this." How strange it is then that once we have sinned, he keeps us from repenting by telling us "what you have done is so uniquely bad and shocking, that no one will ever forgive you." This is untrue. As I have spoken to priesthood leaders about my own weaknesses, small and large, their patient and loving reactions have been, "Greg, everyone deals with these weaknesses in one way or another." And as I have repented, I  have found both forgiveness for my sins and also a willingness to forgive others.

When He was eating at the home of Simon --- an obedient pharisee --- a woman who we know only as "a sinner" came in and washed the Savior's feet. 

>Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him saw it, he spake within himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him: for she is a sinner.
>
>And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee. And he saith, Master, say on.
>
>There was a certain creditor which had two debtors: the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty.
>
>And when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which of them will love him most?
>
>Simon answered and said, I suppose that he, to whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou hast rightly judged.
>
>And he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into thine house, thou gavest me no water for my feet: but she hath washed my feet with tears,
> 
>Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much. ---[Luke 7:36-50](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/nt/luke/7.36-50?lang=eng)

Brothers and Sisters, let us forgive as we have been forgiven. Let us find those who are struggling with the issues that we all struggle with: sin, loss, hopelessness --- and help them find the peace and mercy that we feel through Grace. Let us be patient with others as Christ is patient with us.

In the name of Jesus Christ, amen.